Hey everybody.
Welcome to your first data project.
In this data project, we're gonna be
looking at the Kaggle Titanic Challenge.
Before you see this lecture, and
see this video, go ahead and
make sure you've seen the intro to data
projects, have set up your GitHub account,
and have also set up a Kaggle account.
So, right now,
what we're looking at is just
the nbviewer link to the Python Notebook.
So, if we look at this
IPython Notebook and
just scroll down, we're gonna be
doing a bunch of data analysis.
Might have to separate this
whole project into a few videos
depending on how long it takes.
So what you're gonna do is go ahead and
go to Kaggle Titanic Challenge.
You can just go ahead and
Google search that.
You should be able to reach this page.
And what we're gonna be doing is
messing around with a data set
on the Titanic survival rates for
different passengers.
So, once you get to this page,
you can just go ahead and click here and
get the data.
That will take you to this page,
and you can see here there's
a file name called train.
Go ahead and download that.
It's a CSV file or
a comma separated variables.
So you go ahead and download that,
save it to wherever your
IPython Notebooks are saved,
and then you can open it up.
So, let's go ahead and do this.
So, you can go ahead and
either walk through the IPython Notebook
that's already set up and commented or
just follow along with this video as
we go ahead and start this project.
All right, cool.
So what I'm gonna do is
import pandas pd as always,
and then from pandas import Series and
DataFrame.
Let's go ahead and run that.
Okay.
Let's go ahead and set up our panda data
frame, or pandas data frame, excuse me.
And I'll set that up as titanic_df = pd.
And you should remember from
your lectures, read_csv.
And that file name was train.csv.
Shift to run that.
All right, we got it.
And let's go ahead and
see a preview of the data.
Titanic_df.
Remember to see previews,
you can just see the head.
So let's take a look at each column.
So the first column is just
your passenger ID number.
It's basically almost like
an index starting at one.
But don't worry, panda has already
indexed it for you starting at zero.
Next column is survived, so
this is just zero and one.
So, zero means false,
that passenger did not survive.
One means true,
that passenger did survive.
Pclass, that just means the class
that the passenger was in,
so first, second, or third class.
Then we have the name of the passenger.
We won't actually be using that,
but there's some pretty
interesting names in here.
Next is the sex of the passenger,
so their gender, male or female.
Then the age of the passenger,
and then there's SibSp.
What that stands for is siblings,
did they have siblings on board?
And we'll be looking into that later.
So, one means true,
they did have siblings on board.
Zero means false,
they had no siblings on board.
Par, or Parch, or Par-c-h,
that stands for parents or children,
so what that means is if they, they may
not have had any siblings on board,
but did they have a parent or
a child on board?
And it looks these first five didn't
have any parents or children onboard.
And we'll be looking at that,
we'll be analyzing, let's say,
if they were alone on the ship or
if they had family on the ship.
Then there's the ticket, and then
there's the fare, what they paid for it.
There's the cabin, and a lot of
the cabin information is missing, so
I'll have to drop some NA variables
there as we'll see, future.
And, if you look at this first letter
in the cabins that are filled out,
that stands for the deck,
so there's ABCDEFG decks.
And then embarked.
S, C and Q will stand for cities, and
we'll look at that in the future later on.
But other than that, let's go ahead and
see another way of quickly
grabbing the information.
And if you remember the way we
can do that is titanic_df.info.
So if we take a quick
look at this info data,
it looks like there's 891 passengers.
Ages, we have 714 non-null objects there.
Where we're really
missing some information,
if you notice here, is in cabin.
You only have 204 non-null objects there
versus everything else is
much closer to the 891.
So that's something to
keep in mind later on.
All right, so I'm gonna switch
back here to the IPython Notebook
that's already been filled out
just to look at some questions.
So all good data analysis projects begin
with trying to answer questions, really
trying to get to the point where, what
do I want to achieve from this data set?
So, now that we know the columns and
their categories,
we're gonna think of some questions
to ask, and how we can answer them.
So, first off some basic
questions we thought of, or
I thought of, was,
who were the passengers on the Titanic?
So, what were their ages,
their genders, their classes?
That kind of distribution.
It would be interesting to look at that.
What deck were the passengers on, and
how does that relate to their class?
So are third class people on a certain
deck, on a higher deck, lower deck?
Third question that we're gonna look at
is, where did the passengers come from?
So what cities did they come from?
And fourth question, was who alone,
and who was with family?
And we'll be manipulating the data
to get some nice columns for that.
Next, we're gonna dig a little
deeper with the last question, and
this will have multiple factors to it.
So, the last question is,
what factors helped
someone survive the sinking
of the Titanic?
Okay.
So let's go back to our data.
All right.
And, so
let's start with the first question.
Who were the passengers on the Titanic?
So, let's go ahead and
import some stuff we'll need.
So we're gonna import numpy
since we'll need that as np.
We'll import, let me just do this all
in one cell, import matplotlib.pyplot.
As plt.
Import seaborn, and
you're gonna see some really awesome stuff
that seaborn can do in this data project.
And then lastly matplotlib inline so
we can see everything in the notebook.
Let me just make sure
everything's zoomed in.
I'm gonna zoom in a little more just so
it's easier for you to read.
So 150 here.
Okay, great.
So, we wanna know who were
the passengers on the Titanic.
Let's just first check out a quick gender.
So, to do that, I can call seaborn using
sns, and I can create a factorplot.
So the factorplot allows me to just
pass a column argument, so
I'll pass the sex column,
and then I just have to indicate
where the data's coming from.
So data equals titanic_df, and that's it.
Now if we scroll down here,
we can see that there's way more
males on the Titanic than females.
Ratio looks like it's almost two to one.
So that's a little
interesting thing to see.
But let's go ahead and
separate the genders by classes.
So to do that,
we can do the exact same thing,
sns factorplot, call the sex column,
indicate that the data is
coming from titanic _df,
and then we'll label a hue as Pclass.
So, let's go ahead and see that.
Okay, so now you can see here that most
of the males were in the third class.
And another way we can do this to get
a look at this data is instead of
separating it by female male and
then having separate class columns,
let's go ahead and
do the opposite of what we just did.
So we'll say, call the Pclass, and
then have the hues be separated by sex.
So this kinda is just gonna
reverse this ledge in the columns
to make it look like this.
And here we can really
tell the difference, so,
much more of the third class
were male than female.
The first and
second class were actually more or
less even, especially given
the time period, you can imagine.
So that's an interesting find.
Looks like there's way more males
in the third class than females.
What might be interesting to know,
though, is the split between males,
females, and children.
So I'm sure as you know, there's a famous
line, women and children first, and
that's gonna come into play when
we look at the survival rates.
So we don't just want male and females.
We want male, female, and children.
So, let's go ahead and
use the apply technique to create
a function to handle this.
So what I'm gonna do is make a function.
So I'll say def, and
I'll call my function male_female_child.
And I'll have it take in
a passenger as an object.
And then it's gonna take the age and
sex of that passenger.
And then it's gonna say,
if the age is less than 16,
so we'll define a child as less than 16
years old, you should return child,
and then else, just return the sex.
So that's gonna mean as we pass through
females and males, if they're younger than
16, they'll no longer be female or
male, they'll just be a child.
So we've created that function.
And let's go ahead and apply it.
So, you can revisit lecture 45 for
a refresher on how to use apply, but
I'll show you how to do it right now.
So, we're gonna define a new column called
person, instead of just having sex.
So, I'm gonna say titanic_df,
person is equal to.
Whoops, titanic_df.
And in this case,
I'm going to pass two columns,
age and sex.
So I'll pass it as a list.
And then I'm gonna apply my function,
male_female_child.
And I have to remember that this
is a column, not the index, so
I'll set the axis=1.
So what am I doing here?
I am creating a new column on
the Titanic data frame called person
which will indicate whether
they're female, male, or child.
And the way I'm doing that
is I'm grabbing the age and
sex column values and then applying
that function I just made that will
return child if the age is less than 16.
Otherwise it'll return the sex.
So let's go ahead and see if that worked.
So I ran it, and, let's go ahead and
take a quick view of the first,
let's say, ten rows of my data frame.
All right, and if you look all the way
here on the right, I have male, female,
male, male, and
it looks like I have a child down here.
And if we look at their age,
this was a 14 year old girl.
Okay.
Great.
So, now that we have our person column,
what else can we do?
We've separated the passengers between
male, female, and child, so this will be
important later on cuz of the classic
famous women and children first policy.
So let's try the factorplot
again that we did.
So we'll say sns.factorplot,
oops, factorplot, and I will grab
the class column which is Pclass,
set my data set as titanic_df.
And the hue I'm gonna define now,
instead of sex, is person.
So let's see what this gets us.
So now we've separated all the classes
by male, female or child, and what's
interesting is quite a bit more children
in third class and not so many in first.
I initially would not
have thought about that.
I would have thought there would have
been way less children in third class and
a lot of pampered children in the first,
but my intuition was not right on that.
So, how about we create
a distribution of the ages
to get a more precise picture of
who the passengers really were.
So, we can just create a quick histogram,
if we want, using pandas.
So I can say, grab my age column,
and then I can pass .hist method.
I'll set 70 bins just to
get a really nice histogram
with tons of bins to see the ages.
Okay, and
this is our distribution of the ages here.
So, a peak at really
young children starts to
come down towards ten years old, and then
you get a more normal distribution in age.
Mean looks like it's around,
somewhere around 30ish.
Okay?
And we, let's go ahead and
actually find that mean.
So we can say titanic_df, age,
and then apply the mean method.
Looks like the mean age was about 30,
29.6, etc., etc.
Okay.
Interesting.
Let's go ahead and get a quick overall
comparison of male, female, child.
So how can we do that?
I can again, grab that column,
that person column that we just made,
and do value counts.
So this will count all the unique values.
So looks like we have 537 males, 271
females, and 83 children, total aboard.
What's another way we can
possibly visualize this data?
Well we can use a facet grid to plot
multiple KDE plots on one plot.
So we'll be doing that in the next video.
I'll cut this one off for right now.
But just to review what we've done so
far, we've opened up the data frame,
read that CSV file.
We created a new, well,
we analyzed first males versus females and
their classes, how that all related.
We made a function to create a new
person column using the age and
sex of the passengers, and then we've just
done a quick analysis of the age of all
the passengers and
how that related to their class.
Okay, so next up we'll look at how to mix
KDE plots to analyze the ages and genders.
Okay, I'll see you there.